[Docs+] Getting Started With MongoDB and FastAPI (#250)
mongodb/docs-pymongo: source/integrations/fastapi-integration.txt

=============================
Tutorial: FastAPI Integration
=============================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 3
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: tutorial
 
.. meta::
   :description: Build an application use FastAPI that integrates with a MongoDB deployment by using the PyMongo Async driver.
   :keywords: quick start, tutorial, basics

Overview
--------

`FastAPI <https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/>`__ is a high-performance,
production-ready asynchronous {+language+} framework for building APIs based on
standard {+language+} type hints. In this tutorial, you can learn how to create a CRUD application
that integrates MongoDB with your FastAPI projects.

Tutorial
--------

You can find the completed sample app for this tutorial in the :github:`MongoDB
with FastAPI sample project
repository</mongodb-developer/mongodb-with-fastapi>`__ on GitHub.

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Python v3.9.0 or later
- A MongoDB Atlas cluster
  See the :re:`Getting Started <pymongo-get-started>`__ guide for more information. 

Set-up
~~~~~~

> 

Reviewer: Add an introductory sentence here about what this sub section includes

.. procedure::
   :style: connected

>    .. step:: Clone the example code example

Reviewer: Add periods to procedure steps

>     Run the following command in your terminal to clone the code from the `mongodb-with-fastapi repository <https://github.com/mongodb-developer/mongodb-with-fastapi>`__:

Reviewer: S; implement newlines for readability
```suggestion
    Run the following command in your terminal to clone the
    :github:`mongodb-with-fastapi </mongodb-developer/mongodb-with-fastapi>` GitHub repository:
```

    .. code-block:: shell

       git clone git@github.com:mongodb-developer/mongodb-with-fastapi.git 

   .. step:: Install the required dependencies. 
    

>     .. tip:: Use a Virtual environment

Reviewer: S: indentation level wrong

>        Installing your Python dependencies in a `virtualenv <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`__ with allow for versions of the libraries to be install for individual projects. Before running pip, ensure your ``virtualenv`` is active. 

Reviewer: S: line breaks for readability

>        Installing your Python dependencies in a `virtualenv <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`__ with allow for versions of the libraries to be install for individual projects. Before running pip, ensure your ``virtualenv`` is active. 

Reviewer: S: fix typos
```suggestion
       Installing your Python dependencies in a `virtualenv <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`__ allows you to install versions of libraries for individual projects. Before running any ``pip`` command, ensure your ``virtualenv`` is active. 
```

>     Run the following command in your terminal to install the dependencies listed in the ``requirements.txt`` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Run the following command in your terminal to enter the project folder and
    install the dependencies listed in the ``requirements.txt`` file:
```

    .. code-block:: shell

       cd mongodb-with-fastapi
       pip install -r requirements.txt

>     It may take a few moments to download and install your dependencies.

Reviewer: S: replace may with might

   .. step:: Retrieve your connection string
    
    Follow the :manual:`Find Your MongoDB Atlas Connection String guide </reference/connection-string/#find-your-mongodb-atlas-connection-string>` to retrieve your connection string. 
    
    Run the following code in your terminal to create an environment variable to store your connection string:

    .. code-block:: shell

        export MONGODB_URL="mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<url>/<db>?retryWrites=true&w=majority"
    
    .. tip:: Reset Environment Variables

        Anytime you start a new terminal session, you will must reset this
        environment variable. You can use `direnv <https://direnv.net/>`__ to
        make this process easier. 

   .. step:: Start your FastAPI server
    

>     Run the following code in your terminal to start your FastAPI server:

Reviewer: S: indentation errors

    
    .. code-block:: shell

        uvicorn app:app --reload
    

>     Once the application has started, you can view it in your browser at http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    After the application is successfully running, you can view it in your browser by navigating to  http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs.
```

    
    .. image:: /includes/integrations/fastapi-browser.png

>        :alt: Screenshot of browser and swagger UI

Reviewer: S: introduce image ie " The following image shows the UI generated..."

Connect Your Application to Your Cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All the code for the example application is stored in the `app.py file in the mongodb-with-fastapi repository
<https://github.com/mongodb-developer/mongodb-with-fastapi/blob/master/app.py>`__.

Use the following code to:

1. :ref:`Connect to your MongoDB Atlas cluster <pymongo_connect_atlas>` by using
   the ``AsyncMongoClient()`` method with the ``MONGODB_URL`` environment
   variable and specifying the database named ``college``. 
#. Create a pointer to the ``"college"`` database.

> #. Create a pointer to the ``"students"`` collection

Reviewer: S: remove " from coll/db names

.. code-block:: python
    
    client = AsyncMongoClient(os.environ["MONGODB_URL"],server_api=pymongo.server_api.ServerApi(version="1", strict=True,deprecation_errors=True))
    db = client.get_database("college")
    student_collection = db.get_collection("students")

Create Your Database Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
        

> Our application has three models, the ``StudentModel``, the

Reviewer: S: refer in second person instead of first

``UpdateStudentModel``, and the ``StudentCollection``.

> 

Reviewer: S: remove extra spaces

.. procedure::
   :style: connected

   .. step:: StudentModel Class

    This is the primary model we use as the `response model
    <https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/response-model/>`__ for the majority
    of our endpoints. 

> 

Reviewer: S: fix indentation issues

>     MongoDB uses ``_id`` as the default UUID on its documents. However,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    MongoDB uses ``_id`` as the default UUID on its documents. However, in 
```

    `pydantic <https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/>`__, the data validation
    framework used by FastAPI, leading underscores indicate that a variable is
    private, meaning you cannot assign it a value. Therefore, we name the field
    ``id`` but give it an alias of ``_id`` and set ``populate_by_name`` to
    ``True`` in the model's ``model_config``.  We also set this ``id`` value

>     automatically to ``None``, so that can create a new student with out specifying it. 

Reviewer: S: use second person

    .. note:: BSON to JSON Mapping

       FastAPI encodes and decodes data as JSON strings, which do not support
       all the data types that MongoDB's BSON data type can store. BSON has
       support for more non-JSON-native data types, including ``ObjectId`` which
       is used for the default UUID attribute, ``_id``. Because of this, you
       must convert ``ObjectId`` objects to strings before storing them in the
       ``_id`` field.
       
       For more information about how BSON compares to JSON, see this `JSON and
       BSON <https://www.mongodb.com/json-and-bson>`__ MongoDB article.

>     Define the ``StudentModel`` class using the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Define the ``StudentModel`` class by adding the following code.. . (where?):
```

            Container for a single student record.
            """

            # The primary key for the StudentModel, stored as a `str` on the instance.
            # This will be aliased to ``_id`` when sent to MongoDB,
            # but provided as ``id`` in the API requests and responses.
            id: Optional[PyObjectId] = Field(alias="_id", default=None)
            name: str = Field(...)
            email: EmailStr = Field(...)
            course: str = Field(...)
            gpa: float = Field(..., le=4.0)
            model_config = ConfigDict(
                populate_by_name=True,
                arbitrary_types_allowed=True,
                json_schema_extra={
                    "example": {
                        "name": "Jane Doe",
                        "email": "jdoe@example.com",
                        "course": "Experiments, Science, and Fashion in Nanophotonics",
                        "gpa": 3.0,
                    }
                },
            )

   .. step:: UpdateStudentModel Class

    The ``UpdateStudentModel`` has two key differences from the ``StudentModel``:
    
    -   It does not have an ``id`` attribute, as this cannot be modified

>     -   -   All fields are optional, so you can supply only the fields you want to update

Reviewer: S: list issues

          model_config = ConfigDict(
             arbitrary_types_allowed=True,
             json_encoders={ObjectId: str},
             json_schema_extra={
                 "example": {
                    "name": "Jane Doe",
                    "email": "jdoe@example.com",
                    "gpa": 3.0,
                 }
             },
         )

   .. step:: StudentCollection Class

    The ``StudentCollection`` class is defined to encapsulate a list of
    ``StudentModel`` instances. In theory, the endpoint could return a top-level
    list of ``StudentModel`` objects, but there are some vulnerabilities
    associated with returning JSON responses with top-level lists.

    Define the ``StudentCollection`` class using the following code:

    .. code-block:: python

       class StudentCollection(BaseModel):
           """
           A container holding a list of `StudentModel` instances.

           This exists because providing a top-level array in a JSON response can be a `vulnerability <https://haacked.com/archive/2009/06/25/json-hijacking.aspx/>`__
           """

           students: List[StudentModel]

Create Your Application Routes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Our application has five routes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table describes the application routes you must create to interact with data:
```

    the correct document and return this in our ``JSONResponse``.

    FastAPI returns an HTTP ``200`` status code by default, but we will return a
    ``201`` to explicitly that indicate the student has been created.
    
    Define the ``create_student`` route using the following code:

    .. code-block:: python

        @app.post(
            "/students/",
            response_description="Add new student",
            response_model=StudentModel,
            status_code=status.HTTP_201_CREATED,
            response_model_by_alias=False,
        )
        async def create_student(student: StudentModel = Body(...)):
            """
            Insert a new student record. 
        
            A unique ``id`` will be created and provided in the response.
            """
            new_student = await student_collection.insert_one(
                student.model_dump(by_alias=True, exclude=["id"])
            )
            created_student = await student_collection.find_one(
                {"_id": new_student.inserted_id}
            )
            return created_student

   .. step:: Read Routes

    The application has two read routes: one for viewing all students, and one

>     for viewing an individual student specified by their ``id``.

Reviewer: S: convert into a list

    
    Define the ``list_students`` route to view all students using the following code:

    .. code-block:: python

        @app.get(
            "/students/",
            response_description="List all students",
            response_model=StudentCollection,
            response_model_by_alias=False,
        )
        async def list_students():
            """
            List all the student data in the database. 

            The response is unpaginated and limited to 1000 results.
            """
            return StudentCollection(students=await student_collection.find().to_list())

    .. note:: Results Pagination

       This example uses the ``to_list()`` method; but in a real application, we
       recommend using the `skip and limit parameters
       <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/pymongo/asynchronous/collection.html#pymongo.asynchronous.collection.AsyncCollection.find>`__

>        in ``find`` to paginate your results. 

Reviewer: S: not sure why formatting is off here - also use __ at the end of urls (2 underscores)

            response_model=StudentModel,
            response_model_by_alias=False,
        )
        async def show_student(id: str):
            """
            Get the record for a specific student, looked up by ``id``.
            """
            if (
                student := await student_collection.find_one({"_id": ObjectId(id)})
            ) is not None:
                return student

            raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Student {id} not found")

   .. step:: Update Route

    The ``update_student`` route is like a combination of the ``create_student``
    and the ``show_student`` routes. It receives the ``id`` of the student to
    update, and the new data in the JSON body. 
    
    We don't want to update any fields with empty values, so we iterate over all the parameters in the received
    data and only modify the defined parameters. We use `find_one_and_update
    <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/pymongo/asynchronous/collection.html#pymongo.asynchronous.collection.AsyncCollection.find_one_and_update>`__
    to `$set <https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/operator/update/set/>`__

>     the new values, and then return the updated document. 

Reviewer: Use native links such as source constants for API links and :manual:

.. _pymongo-fastapi:
.. original URL: https://www.mongodb.com/developer/languages/python/python-quickstart-fastapi/

=============================
Tutorial: FastAPI Integration
=============================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 3
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: tutorial
 
.. meta::
   :description: Build an application using FastAPI that integrates with a MongoDB deployment by using the PyMongo Async driver.
   :keywords: quick start, tutorial, basics, code example

Overview
--------

> `FastAPI <https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/>`__ is a modern, high-performance, production-ready asynchronous Python web framework designed for building APIs using standard Python type hints. In this tutorial, you can learn how to build a complete CRUD application that integrates MongoDB and FastAPI. 

Reviewer: S: implement line breaks for readability for future writers

Non-blocking Architecture
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> FastAPI’s asynchronous, non-blocking architecture allows it to handle thousands of concurrent requests without relying on multi-threading. It uses Python’s ``asyncio`` event loop to manage concurrency through coroutines. This allows the application to suspend a request while waiting queries to return. This reduces memory usage and can reduce latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FastAPI’s asynchronous, non-blocking architecture allows it to handle thousands of concurrent requests without relying on multi-threading. It uses Python’s ``asyncio`` event loop to manage concurrency through coroutines. This allows your application to suspend a request while waiting queries to return. This reduces memory usage and can reduce latency.
```

- Support for OAuth2 and JWT authentication and authorization

These features minimize boilerplate code to simplify development. For more information about FastAPI's capabilities, see the `FastAPI website <https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/learn/>`__.

Tutorial
--------

You can find the completed sample app for this tutorial in the :github:`MongoDB
with FastAPI sample project </mongodb-developer/mongodb-pymongo-fastapi>` GitHub repository.

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ensure you have the following components installed and set up before you start
this tutorial:

- Python v3.9.0 or later.
- A MongoDB Atlas cluster.
  To learn how to set up a cluster, see
  the :ref:`Getting Started <pymongo-get-started>` guide for more information. 

Set-up
~~~~~~

Install dependencies, connect to MongoDB and start your FastAPI server:

.. procedure::
   :style: connected

   .. step::  Clone the example code example

      Run the following command in your terminal to clone the code from the
      :github:`mongodb-pymongo-fastapi </mongodb-developer/mongodb-pymongo-fastapi>`
      GitHub repository: 

      .. code-block:: shell

>          git clone git@github.com:mongodb-developer/mongodb-pymongo-fastapi.git 

Reviewer: S: add a step to enter the repo, you do not have to show the actual cd command

   .. step::  Install the required dependencies

>       .. tip:: Use a Virtual environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      .. tip:: Activate a virtual environment
```

        
      .. tip:: Reset Environment Variables

         Anytime you start a new terminal session, you will must reset this
         environment variable. You can use `direnv <https://direnv.net/>`__ to
         make this process easier.  

Connect the Application to Your Cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All the code for the example application is stored in the :github:`app.py file
in the mongodb-pymongo-fastapi </mongodb-developer/mongodb-pymongo-fastapi/blob/master/app.py>` GitHub repository. 

Use this code to perform the following actions:

1. :ref:`Connect to your MongoDB Atlas cluster <pymongo_connect_atlas>` by using
   the ``AsyncMongoClient()`` method with the ``MONGODB_URL`` environment
   variable and specifying the database named ``college``. 
#. Create a pointer to the ``college`` database.
#. Create a pointer to the ``students`` collection

.. code-block:: python
    
    client = AsyncMongoClient(os.environ["MONGODB_URL"],server_api=pymongo.server_api.ServerApi(version="1", strict=True,deprecation_errors=True))
    db = client.get_database("college")

>     student_collection = db.get_collection("students")

Reviewer: S: correct indentation

Review the Database Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
        
This application has three models, the ``StudentModel``, the
``UpdateStudentModel``, and the ``StudentCollection``. These models are
defined in the ``app.py`` file.

All the models in the application build on the `Pydantic <https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/>`__ ``BaseModel``, which provides basic type validation, JSON parsing and serialization, and basic error handling.

StudentModel Class
```````````````````

> This is the primary model used as the `response model
> <https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/response-model/>`__ for the
> majority of the endpoints.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``StudentModel`` is the primary model used as the `response model
<https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/response-model/>`__ for the
majority of the endpoints.  
```

> MongoDB uses ``_id`` as the default identifier for documents. However, in
> Pydantic — the data validation framework used by FastAPI — field names that
> start with an underscore are treated as private attributes and cannot be assigned values directly. To work around this, we can name the field ``id`` in the Pydantic model, but given an alias of ``_id`` so it maps correctly to MongoDB.

Reviewer: S: because you prev explained what pydantic is in line 143
```suggestion
MongoDB uses ``_id`` as the default identifier for documents. However, in
Pydantic field names that
start with an underscore are treated as private attributes and cannot be assigned values directly. To work around this, we can name the field ``id`` in the Pydantic model, but given an alias of ``_id`` so it maps correctly to MongoDB.
```

The ``id`` field is of type ``PyObjectId``, a custom type annotated with a
``BeforeValidator`` that coerces the value into a string. This ensures that MongoDB's ``ObjectId`` can be accepted and serialized properly by the model.

This setup requires the following ``model_config`` options:

- ``populate_by_name=True``: Allows the model to be initialized using either the field name (``id``) or its alias (``_id``)

> - ``arbitrary_types_allowed=True``: Enables support for custom types like ``PyObjectId``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``arbitrary_types_allowed=True``: Enables support for custom types such as ``PyObjectId``
```

``app.py`` file:

.. code-block:: python

    # Represents an ObjectId field in the database.
    # It will be represented as a `str` on the model so that it can be serialized to JSON.
    PyObjectId = Annotated[str, BeforeValidator(str)]

    class StudentModel(BaseModel):
        """
        Container for a single student record.
        """

        # The primary key for the StudentModel, stored as a `str` on the instance.
        # This will be aliased to ``_id`` when sent to MongoDB,
        # but provided as ``id`` in the API requests and responses.
        id: Optional[PyObjectId] = Field(alias="_id", default=None)
        name: str = Field(...)
        email: EmailStr = Field(...)
        course: str = Field(...)
        gpa: float = Field(..., le=4.0)
        model_config = ConfigDict(
            populate_by_name=True,
            arbitrary_types_allowed=True,
            json_schema_extra={
                "example": {
                    "name": "Jane Doe",
                    "email": "jdoe@example.com",
                    "course": "Experiments, Science, and Fashion in Nanophotonics",
                    "gpa": 3.0,
                }
            },

>         )

Reviewer: S: dedent 1 space

UpdateStudentModel Class
`````````````````````````

> The ``UpdateStudentModel`` has some key differences from the ``StudentModel``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``UpdateStudentModel`` has the following key differences from the ``StudentModel``:
```

and BSON <https://www.mongodb.com/json-and-bson>`__ MongoDB article. 

You can see the ``UpdateStudentModel`` definition in the following code in the ``app.py`` file:

.. code-block:: python

   class UpdateStudentModel(BaseModel):
       """
       A set of optional updates to be made to a document in the database.
       """

       name: Optional[str] = None
       email: Optional[EmailStr] = None
       course: Optional[str] = None
       gpa: Optional[float] = None
       model_config = ConfigDict(
           arbitrary_types_allowed=True,
           json_encoders={ObjectId: str},
           json_schema_extra={
               "example": {
                   "name": "Jane Doe",
                   "email": "jdoe@example.com",
                   "course": "Experiments, Science, and Fashion in anophotonics",
                   "gpa": 3.0,
               }
           },
       )

StudentCollection Class
````````````````````````

The ``StudentCollection`` class is defined to encapsulate a list of
``StudentModel`` instances. The purpose of this endpoint is to provide some protection from JSON Hijacking. For more information, you can read this article about `JSON Hijacking

> <https://haacked.com/archive/2009/06/25/json-hijacking.aspx/>`__. 

Reviewer: S: define link target more clearly
eg "Read the "xyz" article on the Haacked website.

      Run the following code in your terminal to create an environment variable
      to store your connection string: 

      .. code-block:: shell

         export MONGODB_URL="mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<url>/<db>?retryWrites=true&w=majority"
        
      .. tip:: Reset Environment Variables

         Anytime you start a new terminal session, you will must reset this
         environment variable. You can use `direnv <https://direnv.net/>`__ to
         make this process easier.  

Connect the Application to Your Cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All the code for the example application is stored in the :github:`app.py file
in the mongodb-pymongo-fastapi
</mongodb-developer/mongodb-pymongo-fastapi/blob/master/app.py>` GitHub
repository.   

Use this code to perform the following actions:

1. :ref:`Connect to your MongoDB Atlas cluster <pymongo_connect_atlas>` by using
   the ``AsyncMongoClient()`` method with the ``MONGODB_URL`` environment
   variable and specifying the database named ``college``. 
#. Create a pointer to the ``college`` database.
#. Create a pointer to the ``students`` collection

.. code-block:: python
    

>    client = AsyncMongoClient(os.environ["MONGODB_URL"],server_api=pymongo.server_api.ServerApi(version="1", strict=True,deprecation_errors=True))

Author: To opt into using the stable API: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/languages/python/pymongo-driver/current/connect/connection-options/stable-api/

>    client = AsyncMongoClient(os.environ["MONGODB_URL"],server_api=pymongo.server_api.ServerApi(version="1", strict=True,deprecation_errors=True))

Reviewer 2: Is this a standard we use for our integration tutorials? Just curious on its inclusion here.
